Player Guides (#5)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: players/installing-java/windows.md

---
title: Installing Java on Windows
description: A step by step guide on how to install Java on Windows.
---

# Installing Java on Windows

> Java is required to run Minecraft and the majority of third party launchers. This guide will show you how to install Java on Windows.

Reviewer: I think these Java pages will be better of in the developer section tbh. The vanilla launcher and basically all 3rd party launchers (other than 1 major one) handle the downloading of Java for you.

The fabric installer (on windows) also goes looking for Java included with Minecraft, meaning that most of the players seeking help wont need to install Java.

I think its going to be out of scope for us to provide details on using 3rd party launchers, that would be better suited to the main wiki.

Author: Will move them once the develop section starts popping up.

---
title: Installing Java on Windows
description: A step by step guide on how to install Java on Windows.
---

# Installing Java on Windows

This guide will walk you through installing Java 17 on Windows.

> The Minecraft Launcher comes with its own java installation, so this section is only relevant if you want to use the Fabric `.jar` based installer, or if you want to use the Minecraft Server `.jar`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Minecraft Launcher comes with its own Java installation, so this section is only relevant if you want to use the Fabric `.jar` based installer, or if you want to use the Minecraft Server `.jar`.
```

## 1. Verify if Java is already installed.

To check if Java is already installed, you must first open the command prompt.

> You can do this by pressing <kbd>Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd> and typing `cmd.exe` into the box that appears.

Reviewer 3: More of a nitpick, but is `cmd.exe` used instead of just `cmd` for any reason? Also, we should direct users to Windows Terminal in Windows 11

Author: Windows terminal doesn't exist on early versions of windows, whilst CMD exists on nearly every version of windows.

Reviewer 3: 1. You didn't answer my first question

2. We already have to split everything up, having a note section saying to use windows terminal on 11

Author: ? I did answer your question. There is zero need to make windows 11 users to use windows terminal when the old method works perfectly fine, and it's completely unnessecary to have another section to use a very specific piece of software for a single version of windows.

Reviewer 3: The question you didn't answer is cmd.exe Vs cmd

Author: Ah, it's clearer to users. That's it. (Try not to bikeshed haha)

![Windows Run Dialog with "cmd.exe" in the run bar.](/assets/players/installing-java/windows-run-dialog.png)

Once you have opened the command prompt, type `java -version` and press <kbd>Enter</kbd>.

If the command runs successfully, you will see something like this. If the command failed, proceed to the next step.

![Command prompt with "java -version" typed in.](/assets/players/installing-java/windows-java-version.png)

::: warning
To use the majority of modern Minecraft versions, you'll need at least Java 17 installed. If this command displays any version lower than 17, you'll need to update your existing java installation.
:::

## 2. Download the Java 17 installer.

> To install Java 17, you'll need to download the installer from [AdoptOpenJDK](https://adoptium.net/en-GB/temurin/releases/?os=windows&package=jdk&version=17).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install Java 17, you'll need to download the installer from [Adoptium](https://adoptium.net/en-GB/temurin/releases/?os=windows&package=jdk&version=17).
```

You'll want to download the `Windows Installer (.msi)` version:

> ![AdoptOpenJDK download page with Windows Installer (.msi) highlighted.](/assets/players/installing-java/windows-download-java.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Adoptium download page with Windows Installer (.msi) highlighted.](/assets/players/installing-java/windows-download-java.png)
```

You should choose `x86` if you have a 32-bit operating system, or `x64` if you have a 64-bit operating system.

> The majority of modern computers will have a 64-bit operating system, but if you're unsure, you can go back to the command prompt and type `wmic os get osarchitecture` to find out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The majority of modern computers will have a 64-bit operating system. If you are unsure, try using the 64-bit download.
```

## 3. Run the installer!

> Follow the steps in the installer to install Java 17, when you reach this page, you should set the following features to “Entire feature will be installed on local hard drive”:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the steps in the installer to install Java 17. When you reach this page, you should set the following features to “Entire feature will be installed on local hard drive”:
```

> - `Set JAVA_HOME variable`

Reviewer 2: Uhh, not PATH?

Author: Eh, variable, path variable, same thing. It's what the installer says. I'll add clarification.
